# Giving an Interview

## Welcome:
Introduce yourself (Leading Mentor = Lead Developer for [Company]; Backup Mentor
= Sr. Developer) and thank them for coming in for the interview.

Outline the interview briefly. “Just so you know we are going to be asking you
several questions to better understand you and your skills after which we’ll
have you do some whiteboarding for us. Have you ever whiteboarded?”  “Just a
reminder for the whiteboarding portion, remember to talk out your entire thought
process. The more you explain and talk out the better insight we get as to how
you approach and solve problems which is what we want.”

## Questions – 15 Minutes:
Always start with => “So, to start out please tell us a little bit about
yourself.” Take notes of what they say in the “Interview Notes” section so you
can give specific feedback on certain responses they give.

Listen to responses and ask follow up questions. If they mention something that
you want to dig a little deeper into then ask a follow up question about it.
“You mentioned you really like [tech or process]. Tell me about a time you used
that on a recent project and why you chose that.” Or “Could you tell me a little
bit more about what [something they mentioned]?”

I like to play off what they say. They need to understand that whatever they
bring up will dictate the direction of the interview. Often times if they come
in unprepared they will throw in filler stuff that isn’t accurate or just trying
to make themselves sound better than they are. If you follow up on some of those
things and they get stuck it will be a good learning experience for them to come
more prepared to an interview. Don’t overdo this but follow up questions are
good for them.

Use a combination of technical questions and situational questions.

## Situational examples:
Tell me about a recent project you’ve worked on.  Have you worked on a team of
developers? What was the biggest challenge you faced working with others?  Tell
me about a time when you had to do something really hard in code. How did you
solve it? Show me the code.  What is your favorite piece of code that you have
written?  What would you say is your favorite part of development?

## Technical examples:
What API’s have you used and how did you use them in your project?  What other
technologies/languages or features are you looking forward to
learning/implementing in the future?  Why did you choose Swift over Objective C/
Angular over REACT?  Do you have any hosted projects/ projects in app store? Can
you show me?

Remember to be taking notes and writing down things to give feedback on; both
POSITIVE and things they can work on.

## Whiteboarding – 10 Minutes:
Transition to the whiteboarding portion => “Thank you for all your answers, we’d
like to transition to a whiteboarding question now. Remember that the goal of
this is to help us understand how you think and approach a problem so please
talk out all your thoughts and ideas.”

Use a simple toy problem/ basic stretch problem to have them code on the
whiteboard. Start simple and if they solve it too quickly then have them add a
level of difficulty into their solution.

Often they will be really quiet while deep in thought. In this case, ask them
what they are thinking or remind them to talk out all their thoughts.

Let them struggle through the question. Sometimes it is obvious they don’t know
how to solve the problem. Encourage them to keep trying. If they are really
stuck remind them that we realize most developers use the internet when they get
stuck and tell them they can use you as their internet. It’s ok for them to ask
you questions – don’t give away the answers but help them enough to get onto the
next part of the problem.

If, even after you give them some hints, they can’t code the answer then stop
them and do the following. Say, “Let’s try something different. I’m going to
teach you how I would solve this problem and please ask me any questions you
have.” Then whiteboard the solution and explain what your process. After you
finish ask, “Does that make sense? Any questions?” If they say they get it, then
erase your work and ask them to code it again and explain the process.

Thank them and ask them to sit down. Finish the interview with this last
question, “What questions do you have for us?” and answer as you can. Once they
say no then say something like, “Great, we’ll give you our decision by the end
of the week.”

## Things to pay attention to:

### Behavioral:
How was their eye contact?  Did they use their hands well or not at all?  Was
their posture engaging or closed off?  Did they speak in monotone or were they
interesting to listen to?  Did they strike a balance of “humble confidence” or
did they come off too cocky or too insecure?

### Answers:
How was the length of their answers? Should be no longer than 20 – 30 seconds.

### Whiteboarding:
A good method for doing whiteboarding is this: Repeat the question and ask
follow up questions On the left side of the board write down what they are
looking for so you can reference it. Talk through and write out the steps you
are going to take to solve the problem, using words not code. Ask the
interviewer questions if they can’t think through the logic involved to answer
the question. Begin coding and talk through each step. The more they talk the
better, even if it’s explaining basic concepts. After finishing the problem run
a couple of example tests and explain how it will work at each step (this also
allows them to catch errors they may have made). Finish by being confident in
your answer or by asking for feedback as to how they would have solved the
problem.

