# [Unsuck The Web](http://unsucktheweb.com/)

## The _Unsucked Web_ Manifesto

**WHEREAS,** the web is built on an amazing collection of features that's ever-expanding, both in complexity and in size
of resources;

**WHEREAS,** designers and developers currently exert near-complete control over the experience a user has on their site
or web application;

**WHEREAS,** designers and developers tend to design _for the best experience_, making assumptions of free, fast,
unlimited bandwidth to deliver this experience to users;

**WHEREAS,** user access to a lower fidelity experience is often treated as unimportant to business goals, and usually
given the same amount of (non-)care as _Accessibility_ concerns, which is to say little to none, or as older
"unsupported" browsers (like IE6);

**WHEREAS,** many users are often disenfranchised from _this web_ because a site or web application is too big---either
_too costly_ in time to download over slow internet, or _too costly_ in money over metered bandwidth, and must
unfortunately therefore make a choice simply not to visit at all;

**WHEREAS,** principles such as _progressive enhancement_ and _responsive design_ are nearly universally accepted among
the community, but mainly only focus on device capabilities and characteristics instead of _user choice_;

**WHEREAS,** we _can_ build a web that embraces users and gives them _choice_ over their experience;

**WE THEREFORE ASSERT** the following principles of _unsucked web_ design:

1.  **THAT** designers and developers of sites and web applications must be free to continue to adopt the latest and
greatest web technologies as appropriate to their goals, including retina images, web fonts, etc.

1.  **THAT** all sites and web applications must _also_ at a minimum provide a useful, if significantly limited, _low
fidelity_ version that consists variously of: HTML/text, basic styling, a few (low-resolution) images, etc.

1.  **THAT** designers and developers of sites and web applications must begin to intentionally design the web in
_layers_, not unlike the original principles of _progressive enhancement_, and not dissimilar from breakpoints in
_responsive design_. However, these layers of features must adapt not only to device capabilities, but also to **user
choice**.

1.  **THAT** no matter how powerful a user's device may be, or how awesome its screen, designers and developers have to
**respect** that a user may not want to pay the _time_ or _money_ for those retina images, web fonts, etc.

1.  **THAT** developers know how to fiddle with settings to control some aspects of this already, but regular
non-technical users do not, and _should not have to_. User choice over the desired fidelity of experience on a site or
web application must be easily expressible in the main UI of a browser, and must be on a per-site basis. For instance, a
user may choose in loading a particular site between "Faster Load" or "More Features".

1.  **THAT** ultimately, if there's a conflict between a user's expressed (or default) choice of fidelity of experience
and the experience offered or forced by the site or web application, _user choice must take precedence_. Browsers must
_respect_ the user choice and refuse to download (not just suppress display, as in responsive design) resources that
exceed chosen fidelity.

